In arrays, memory is static—we must predict the size beforehand.

In dynamic systems, you don’t know the size in advance, and you need flexibility. For this, C provides the “Four Big Ones”:

The Four Big Functions: malloc(), calloc(), realloc(), free()

1. malloc()

pointer = (castType*) malloc(size);
pointer = (float*) malloc(100 * sizeof(float));

Allocates memory for a given type and size.

The memory may not be contiguous—blocks may not be next to each other.

Memory is uninitialized; it may contain garbage values. You can modify it afterward.

Think of malloc() as a “raw” memory allocator—it just grabs space, doesn’t touch it.

2. calloc()

pointer = (castType*) calloc(n, size);
pointer = (float*) calloc(100, sizeof(float));

Allocates memory for n elements, each of a given size.

Memory is guaranteed contiguous—all blocks are next to each other.

Memory is initialized to 0.

Unlike malloc(), calloc() is a little more “gentle”: it clears the memory for you before you use it.



3. realloc()

pointer = realloc(pointer, new_size);

If you already have allocated memory and need to resize it, use realloc().

realloc() changes the size while preserving existing data as much as possible.


4. free()

free(pointer);

Use free() when a dynamically allocated memory block is no longer needed.

Always free memory at the end of malloc(), calloc(), or realloc() to avoid memory leaks.

!!!Important: Forgetting free() is a rookie mistake—never skip it!



Extra Notes / Best Practices

Always check if malloc(), calloc(), or realloc() returns NULL → memory allocation failed.

Use calloc() if you need clean zeroed memory.

malloc() just grabs memory—it doesn’t initialize it.

Always free() memory as soon as it’s no longer needed.

Use sizeof(type) instead of hardcoding bytes.

Memory blocks may or may not be contiguous with malloc(); if you need guaranteed contiguity, use calloc().


Quick mental image for the Four Big Functions:

malloc() → “Give me X bytes, I don’t care what’s inside.”

calloc() → “Give me X bytes and clear them to zero first.”

realloc() → “Resize this memory block to a new size.”

free() → “I’m done, release it back to the system.”